   Consolidated guidelines/rules for the usage of different grants to the Ph.D. Research Scholars

 The existing Scheme for Research Scholar Travel Award (R.S.T.A.) and Research Excellence Travel
 Award (R.E.T.A.) grants for the Ph.D. Scholars notified earlier vide Notification No.
 IITD/A&E/PGS/A-2/2018/61578 dated 19.04.2018 has been revised.
 The revised scheme is as under: -
  Research Scholar Travel Award (RSTA) Grant:
  (i)   All Ph.D. students irrespective of their registration status (Full Time or Part Time) or category
        would be eligible for the travel grant of Rs 20,000 from MoE Funds.
  (ii) All full time Ph.D. students (irrespective of category) and all part time Ph.D. students who are
        employed in sponsored research or consultancy projects of the Institute through IRD/FITT or
        any other scheme of the Institute would only be eligible for the additional travel grant of Rs
        1,80,000 from IRD funds. Accordingly, they will get travel support upto Rs. 2,00,000 (Rs.
        20,000/- + Rs 1,80,000/- as notified vide Notification No. IITD/A&E/PGS/A-2/2023-181757
        dated 03.08.2023).
  (iii) For processing of RSTA from IRD funds, there would be a requirement of providing proof at the
        time of application of having applied to two other external agencies for support. The requirement
        is only to provide proof of having applied and not related to getting any response from the
        external sponsors. However, the responses must be submitted along with the reimbursement
        claims.
  (iv) Those Ph.D. students would be eligible for RSTA who are in good standing, have completed
        their comprehensive examination requirements, are within 5 years of registration, and have not
        submitted their thesis (conference dates should be before the 5-year date or thesis submission
        date, whichever is earlier). In exceptional cases, this may also be availed by those research
        scholars who are within 5 years of registration, have submitted thesis but Ph.D. viva is not over
        and are continuing to work on some project in the Institute and drawing fellowship.
  (v) A Ph.D. student eligible for availing RSTA for both international and national conferences to be
        held abroad and in the country, can avail the same for maximum of two times (i.e. supporting
        partially or totally the travel of two conferences) during his registration as a Ph.D. Student.
        However, total maximum amount for conference travel will be Rs. 2,00,000/-.
  (vi) The grant is to be used only for travel to conferences of repute where the candidate is presenting
        a paper, and not attending training schools/ workshops, etc.
  (vii) Approval Process: RSTA application must be recommended by the Supervisor, approved by the
        Head of the Academic Unit and submitted to the Academic Section. The Academic Section will
        issue the notification subject to the fulfilling of all the eligibility criteria for this purpose. Any
        expenditure related the travel must be made only after the final approval and notification from
        the Academic Section.
(viii) Travel Route: The travel route should be New Delhi – Conference Venue – New Delhi. Any
        change in the route citing low-cost fares or any other reason is not permissible.

        However, the students may claim reimbursement for flights undertaken from the airport situated
        in the Delhi NCR for both onward and return travel related to the conference. (added vide
        Notification No. IITD/Acad/PG/466733 dated 18.11.2025)

        For travel to a foreign country, air travel from New Delhi to the nearest international
        airport in the same country may be allowed. The onward journey to the conference venue
        may be made by road, rail, or air. (added vide Notification No. IITD/Acad/PG/441955 dated
        01.09.2025)
 (ix)    Number of travel grants of Rs. 1,80,000/- per year is limited to a total provision of Rs. 4.50
         Crores per year from the Research Promotion Fund of IRD.
 (x)     Number of travel grants of Rs. 20,000/- per year is limited to a total provision of Rs. 50 Lakhs
         per year from the Institute funds.
 (xi)    The expenditure assigned to Accommodation + DA will be reimbursed @ US $ 150/- per day
         for an international conference held abroad. The reimbursement of air fare will be as per Govt.
         of India rules. The journey by air should be performed by the shortest route in economy class.
         The tickets must be booked by Ashoka Tours & Travels and tours help desk available in the
         campus or through the following Web portals: -
           a. IRCTC
           b. Ashoka Tours & Travels
           c. Balmer Lawrie & Co.
(xii)    The entitlement for travel for a national level conference shall be as per IRD norms for JRF/SRF
         which is as under at present: -
           a. By Air (Economy Class)/AC 2 Tier by train and tickets must be booked by the authorised
                companies mentioned in para (xi) above.
           b. Hotel Accommodation up to Rs. 3,000/- per day (with original bill)
           c. Local Travel and Food Bill up to Rs. 1,000/- per day (with original bill)
(xiii)     Reimbursement of the above expenditure incurred will be considered maximum for 1 day
           before and 1 day after the conference period, for both international/national conferences.
(xiv)      For conferences held abroad, Ex-India leave on-duty may be given for a maximum of 2 days
           before and 2 days after the conference period. Any leave beyond this period will be treated as
           Personal Leave and will be debited from the 30 days leave granted to a Research Scholar in an
           academic year.
(xv)       In case, one or both the travel grants is/are granted to a student but for genuine reasons he/she
           fails to undertake the travel (Visa denial/delay, health etc.), he/she can still claim
           reimbursement on all expenses including cancellation charges incurred. However, if the student
           claims reimbursement he/she would be considered as a beneficiary under the scheme and would
           count towards one travel support with the claimed amount.

          Students shall be required to book their travel tickets only through the authorized
          agencies only, after obtaining visa clearance from the embassy of the visiting country.
          Expenses incurred on travel tickets booked prior to visa clearance shall not be reimbursed
          if the visa is subsequently denied. (added vide Notification No. IITD/Acad/PG/441955
          dated 01.09.2025)

          The VISA fee shall be reimbursed only once, even if the application is refused or denied again.
          (added vide Notification No. IITD/Acad/PG/466733 dated 18.11.2025)


(xvi)     RSTA rules should be relooked / revised after every five years to incorporate the possible
          inflation in the travel/living costs.

                           ------------------------------------------------ -------------------------
